---
layout: item
format: Role Terminated
title: "PLACEHOLDER: Cultural Studies for Creative Professionals"
educator: "Sean Purcell"
level: "200 - Sophomore"
categories: [ "Cultural Studies", Arts ]
disc: "Cultural Studies"
school: "Indiana University"
year: 2019
term: "Fall"
intro: "This is a placeholder example for testing functionality."
shortintro: "This course taught cultural studies principles to arts students."
banstate: "This educator was fired for X reason."
identifier: "20202_IU_001"
---

**The Medical Museum: Histories, Ethics, and Possibilities**  
**Collins CLC L-210**  
**Tuesday, Thursday 10:10am-11:25am**

Sean Purcell — Instructor  
Office Hours: Tuesdays 11:30am-12:30pm; Fridays 11:00am-12:00pm; or Upon Request.

**Course Description**  
	Gunther Von Hagens has made a career of displaying the dead. His subjects are dissected, carefully articulated, and injected with plastinating chemicals in ways that change their corpse from a still object, to something that can be seen in motion. In some ways they are very alive, and in others they are reminiscent of the medieval *memento mori*, their corpses a grim reminder of the viewer’s own mortality. These anatomized, spectacular corpses are the center attraction of von Haggens’ many *Body Worlds* exhibits, which both display the dead in exciting and lively poses and purport to teach the viewers about their bodies. Blending entertainment and education, these exhibits are one moment in a long history of the display of the human body as an object of fascination, an index from which to learn, and an attraction used to draw in an audience.  
	This course uses the medical museum, in its many forms, to wrestle with the historical, scientific, and popular representations of medical science. It is also designed to teach students the ethical knots which challenge medical research, the display of human remains, and the troubling colonialist origins of the museum as we know it today.  
	Over the course of fifteen weeks, the students will learn the basics of the fields of new museology, medical humanities, death studies, digital humanities, and museum practice. Through this study, students will learn a number of skills—like how to read primary source documents, how to design an online exhibit—while learning about the history of medicine, the use of human remains in scientific research, and the troubling, common exploitation of sick patients at the hands of medical practitioners. At every turn, students will negotiate with the violent, exploitive history of medical research, and be asked to consider the ethics of display in relation to the practices of scientists, archivists, and museum curators. As part of this class, students will have the opportunity to work with primary materials available through online repositories, and will be able to spend weeks working from the exhibition *Imaging Consumption* (an installation designed and produced by the instructor) which will be on display at the Cook Center during the Fall 2023 semester.[^1]  
**Learning Outcomes**

* Students will learn about the politics and history of medical experimentation, and the practices of posthumous display engaged by doctors, museum curators, and side-show operators.  
* Students will learn about museological practice, and the “new museological” turn of the 1990’s. They will develop ways of thinking and talking critically about these institutions.  
* Students will engage with the politics of acquisition and provenance when engaging with historical material of unethical origins. In turn, students will learn multiple approaches to ethics, and apply them in class.  
* Students will get an opportunity to devise their own historical, museological projects, developing online exhibits with primary sources.

**Weekly Classes Discussions and Labs**  
Class will be broken into Discussion Sessions and Lab Sessions. 

**Discussion Sessions** will be group conversations, in which students will be asked to read assigned articles and chapters. During these sessions, one group of students will be asked to lead a 5-10 minute **Object Lesson** (see assignments below), where they will introduce the class using an example from medical history that they choose, and use this object to start the conversation with a series of open questions. 

**Lab Sessions** will be experience learning opportunities, where students, working in groups, will learn, through hands-on experience, different methods of analysis in the fields of cultural studies, digital humanities, historiography, and museology. In some sessions, we will be working with the same material used in the *Imaging Consumption* installation, which we will view later in the semester. These sessions will show *how* humanists do their research, and help reinforce concepts learned in class.

 **Most weeks will have a Tuesday discussion session and a Thursday lab session**.

**A Note About Accommodations for Sensitive Material**  
The Medical Museum class covers some of the most horrific subjects in medical history. In many ways, the history of medicine is a history of abject horrors, and as an educator, I try not to shy away from these subjects. Partly, this is because I trust my students are equipped to grapple with these materials, and partly because I see it as an ethical responsibility to engage with these pasts. However, as these pasts involve medical exploitation, murder, violence against women and children, and the disregard of bodily autonomy, I do not want to make this class unapproachable to those who may be affected by engagement with these pasts.

**I am happy to work with individuals, or the class as a whole, to provide different, less troubling materials that cover similar issues during our weeks**. I will also make sure to provide alternative materials during labs for individuals or groups who request it. 

**Assignments — (Total Points for the Course 500\)**   
**Object Lesson — 100 Points**  
The class will be broken into 8 groups, who will each select one session to provide an object that is related to the readings we cover in class. 

An “object” for this assignment, can be any primary source material related to the subject in class. This can include (but is not limited to) a textbook from the period of inquiry, an illustration or engraving, a portrait of a medical professional, x-rays, microscope slides, exhibition materials, archival catalogs, or published reports. 

This object may be related directly to the readings, be thematically related, or conceptually related. Each week the students will be tasked with bringing in an object to start our Tuesday discussion session, and will be asked to provide a summary of the readings, as well as a 3-5 open discussion questions.

**Groups are encouraged to meet with the lecturer ahead of time to discuss options, ideas, and brainstorm the class session.**

**Virtual Exhibit — 400 Points Total**  
Students will be tasked with developing an online exhibit on a research question of their choice, using primary materials available through IU’s libraries or HathiTrust. Students can work individually or in groups of up to three people.

Rather than this assignment being a single, heavily weighted turn in, **students will submit a series of smaller drafts as they develop their project**. Many of these turn-ins will be graded on completion, and offer an opportunity for the instructor to gauge technical, conceptual, or rhetorical progress in the development of the final assignment, as well as provide detailed feedback to the student or group of students early and often.

**Project Proposal — 25 Points**  
Students will propose 3-5 different potential research projects (1-2 sentences, with 2-4 **keywords** associated with these questions).   
These proposals can be as refined or as rough as you wish. An example of this would be: “I want to know more about medical ethics. Keywords: medical ethics, experimentation, Nuremberg Trials”

Students will also determine if they are working in groups or if they want to work individually. Students can form groups at this point, or can see if there are students working on similar ideas and group together after this assignment.

**Project Refinement — 50 Points**  
Students will choose one project from their proposed projects, and write a 100-150 word abstract about 1\) what the project is, 2\) why they are interested in the project, 3\) what questions they have about the object or subject of their research, and 4\) what they hope to produce at the end of the class.

**Primary Object Show and Tell — 50 Points**  
Students will find one primary object related to their research project and write a 250 word close reading of the source.

**Web Exhibit Draft — 25 Points**  
Students will upload a draft of one primary object as an image, video, or audio file, as well as one piece of text (25-100 words) describing that object on their website.

**Annotated Bibliography — 100 Points**  
Students will select 5 scholarly, secondary sources (at least 3 from outside the class) and for each source: write a summary of the source (100 words), write why they think it is important to their research goals/questions (50 words), and if there are any issues they see with the piece (up to 100 words).

**Lightning Talk — 50 Points**  
**Due Week 15/Finals Week**  
Students will give a 3 minute lightning talk summarizing their work for the class.  
Students will be asked to upload a single powerpoint slide on Tuesday, December 5th to facilitate a smooth presentation period on Thursday, December 7th.

**Final Web Page — 100 Points**  
	**Due Tuesday, December 12th at 11:59pm**  
The final, culmination of the web exhibit. Students’ work will be uploaded by the end of day Tuesday, during exams week.

**Participation —**   
This class is designed as a discussion based seminar. It is expected that students participate in the activities and class sessions, and that students are prepared for each class, having read any materials or prepared any turn-ins due that day. 

**Readings —**   
Students will have around 25-50 pages of reading assigned each week. Most of the time, the material will be for the discussion session, but some of the lab sessions may also require reading. Students are expected to read and be ready to discuss these materials ahead of the discussion period.

I am also supplying **optional readings** that fit the theme and research objectives. I will draw upon these texts in our discussions, but they are optional for students. They are meant for students who are especially interested in the topics discussed, and can be helpful resources for the final project.

**One more note:** Please reach out to me directly if you are having issues comprehending or completing assigned readings. We can discuss strategies and approaches for reading academic articles. Also, the materials covered in the readings will be discussed in class, and reinforced in labs, so if you are not understanding them completely, **there will be ample opportunities for different kinds of learners to grasp the material**.

**Textbooks —**  
**There is no textbook for this class.** All readings for the class will be supplied on Canvas.  
If you are interested in some themes or ideas in this class, here are some suggested books to acquire:  
Hallam, Elizabeth. 2016\. *Anatomy Museum: Death and the Body Displayed*. London: Reaktion Books.  
Redman, Samuel J. 2016\. *Bone Rooms: From Scientific Racism to Human Prehistory in Museums*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  
Richardson, Ruth. 1987\. *Death, Dissection and the Destitute*. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.  
Rosenbloom, Megan. 2020\. *Dark Archives: A Librarian’s Investigation into the Science and History of Books Bound in Human Skin*. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.  
Troyer, John. 2020\. *Technologies of the Human Corpse*. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

**Attendance**  
I will be taking attendance at the beginning of each class, but only for my own records. I take attendance so that I make sure students are attending regularly, and so I reach out to students who may be struggling to make it to class before they fall too far behind in the semester.

As we are still in a global health crisis, and because life can unexpectedly derail even the best laid plans, I am happy to work with you if you miss a large  number of classes, if you test covid positive, if there is a family  emergency, or if there is any other problem that is causing you to miss  class. **All I ask is that you communicate with me.** If you are reading  this and would like 10 points of extra credit, please email me a picture of a cute animal by Friday, September 8th.

**Accommodations for Students with Disabilities**  
Every attempt will be made to accommodate qualified students with disabilities (e.g. mental health, learning, chronic health, physical, hearing, vision, neurological, etc.). You must establish your eligibility for support through Indiana University’s [Office of Disability Services for Students](http://www.iu.edu/~ada/students/IU%20Bloomington/index.shtml) If you have a documented learning disability that may affect your work in this class, please provide your instructor with appropriate documentation by the end of the first week of class (by 5:00 p.m. on Friday, January 14th). Further information about university policies and procedures regarding learning disabilities is available at the above link.  
   
**Your Personal Wellbeing and Health:**   
Students can face challenges in their personal lives, and it is a sign of great strength to acknowledge that and ask for help. As the instructor, I want to help guide you to appropriate resources if you come to me in confidence. You can always go directly to Indiana University’s Counseling & Psychological Services (CAPS) at the Health Center for support (812-855-5711). CAPS can help students on many issues, including depression, anxiety, relationship issues, sexual assault, feelings of inadequacy, substance abuse and difficulty adjusting to the routines and expectations of student life. More information about CAPS is available here: [http://healthcenter.indiana.edu/counseling/index.shtml](http://healthcenter.indiana.edu/counseling/index.shtml) (Links to an external site.).  
   
**Accommodations for Religious Observances:**   
Indiana University respects the right of all students to observe their religious holidays. However, it is your responsibility to notify me in advance. Please notify me of expected absences for religious observances by the end of the second week of class.  
   
**Student Support & Cultural Awareness Centers**   
[African American Arts Institute](https://aaai.indiana.edu/).  The institute preserves and promotes African American culture through performance, education, creative activity, research, and outreach.   
[Asian Cultural Center](https://asianresource.indiana.edu/).  This center promotes awareness and understanding of Asian and Asian American cultures, histories, and issues through institutional resources, educational support, and community outreach.   
[IU Counseling and Psychological Services-CAPS](https://healthcenter.indiana.edu/counseling/index.html). Take care of your mental health here.  Services for those who speak English, Mandarin, Spanish, and Hindi/Urdu.   
[Office of Disability Services for Students](https://studentaffairs.indiana.edu/student-support/disability-services/). This office is dedicated to ensuring that students with disabilities have the tools, support services, and resources that allow equal access and reasonable accommodations to be successful at Indiana University Bloomington. This website is where you start if you need in-class accommodations for academic activities.    
[First Nations Educational and Cultural Center](https://firstnations.indiana.edu/). This center’s mission is to build a Native community within the university, enhance the recognition and reputation of these communities, and provide educational opportunities that further awareness of the First Nations people.   
[La Casa Latino Cultural Center](https://lacasa.indiana.edu/). This center promotes academic excellence, personal and professional growth, and greater historical, political, and cultural awareness of the Latino community through educational and social programs.   
[LGBTQ+ Culture Center](https://lgbtq.indiana.edu/). The center serves as a resource and information center for the IU LGBTQ+ community and people who want to better understand LGBTQ+ issues and concerns.   
[Neal Marshall Black Cultural Center](https://blackculture.indiana.edu/index.html). The center connects IU to Black culture, promotes public awareness of the Black experience, and celebrates students’ academic and leadership achievements.   
[Student Health Services](https://healthcenter.indiana.edu/). The place on campus for all your health care needs.   
[Center for Veterans and Military Students](https://studentaffairs.indiana.edu/student-support/veteran-services/index.html).  The center helps veterans and military-connected students make the transition from the military to IU and provides support and resources during their time on campus.   
   
**Academic Misconduct**  
You are responsible for doing your own work. Indiana University’s Code of Student Rights, Responsibilities & Conduct offers the following on plagiarism: “A student must not adopt or reproduce ideas, words, or statements of another person without appropriate acknowledgment. A student must give credit to the originality of others and acknowledge an indebtedness whenever he or she does any of the following:  
   
a. Quotes another person’s actual words, either oral or written;  
b. Paraphrases another person’s words, either oral or written;  
c. Uses another person’s idea, opinion or theory; or  
d. Borrows facts, statistics, or other illustrative material, unless the information is common knowledge.”  
   
Any assignment, exam or other submitted work that has been plagiarized may earn zero points (“F”). Please note that the penalty for an act of academic misconduct can be a failing grade for the course or expulsion from the University. Complete information about Indiana University’s Code of Student Rights, Responsibilities & Conduct is available [here](http://studentcode.iu.edu/).  
   
A final note: [IU policy](http://policies.iu.edu/policies/categories/academic-faculty-students/academic-student-affairs/cheating-plagiarism.shtml) states that faculty members have a responsibility to foster the “intellectual honesty as well as the intellectual development of students.... Should the faculty member detect signs of plagiarism or cheating, it is his or her most serious obligation to investigate these thoroughly, to take appropriate action with respect to the grades of students, and in any event to report the matter to the Dean of Students. The necessity to report every case of cheating, whether or not further action is desirable, arises particularly because of the possibility that this is not the student\`s first offense, or that other offenses may follow it. Equity also demands that a uniform reporting practice be enforced; otherwise, some students will be penalized while others guilty of the same actions will go free.”

Block 1: Contexts and Critiques

**Week 1 \- Introductions; Bruised Histories**  
Tuesday, August 22nd — Introduction to the Class

In Class: We will be introducing ourselves, and going over the syllabus. Time permitting, we will begin exploring options for digital interventions in the history of medicine, using the Net.Create platform**.**

Thursday, August 24th — Discussion: Remains and Medicine  
Reading: Ruth Richardson. “Introduction” in *Death Dissection and the Destitute*. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), xiii-xvii.

In Class: We will discuss the life, death, and posthumous capture of Charles Byrne. We will use this case study to consider the historical, ethical, and scientific ramifications regarding the posthumous display of human remains in museums. We will then discuss the Richardson chapter in detail, going into how medical research impacted the lives of the urban poor in the United Kingdom.

**Week 2: The Politics of Human Remains**  
Tuesday, August 29th — Discussion: Race and Museum Display  
Readings:  
 Samuel Redman. “Prologue” in *Bone Rooms: from Scientific Racism to Human Prehistory in Museums*. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2016), 1-15.  
Harriet Washington. “Introduction: The American Janus of Medicine and Race” in *Medical Apartheid*. 1-22.  
Optional Readings:  
 John Harley Warner. “The Aesthetic Grounding of Modern Medicine” *Bulletin of the History of Medicine* 88\. 1-18.

Object Lesson: [The MOVE Bombing and the Misuse of Remains](https://prss.sas.upenn.edu/news/response-retention-and-use-move-bombing-victims%E2%80%99-remains-penn-museum)

In Class: We will discuss the term “scientific racism”, and consider the context of these practices in the context of the museum and other institutions of knowledge production. I will also be modeling an example of of the **object lesson** assignment using a contemporary example from the 1985 MOVE Bombing in Philadelphia.

Thursday, August 30th — Lab: Visual Analysis, Medical Portraits

In Class: Building on our discussion on race and medicine, we will be examining dozens of portraits of medical professionals acquired online. Students will learn techniques of visual analysis, with an emphasis on photographic technologies in medical culture. Broken into groups, each will analyze different kinds of medical photographs (x-rays, specimens, doctor’s portraits, and promotional materials), before being asked to discuss the material with the class.

**Week 3: Histories of Display**  
Tuesday, September 5th — Discussion: The New Museology  
Readings:   
Peter Vergo. “Introduction” in *The New Museology*. (London: Reaktion Books, 1989\) 1-5.  
Ludmilla Jordanoba. “Objects of Knowledge: A Historical Perspective on Museums” in *The New Museology*. (London: Reaktion Books, 1989), 22-40.  
Optional Readings:  
Tony Bennet. “The Exhibitionary Complex” in *The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics*. (London & New York: Routledge, 1995), 59-88.  
Optional Reading: Rhiannon Mason. “Cultural Theory and Museum Studies” in *A Companion to Museum Studies*, Sharon Macdonald ed. (Malden: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 17-32.

Object Lesson: Student Selection

In Class: We are reading from an influential collection of essays which marked the formation of a movement in museums called “new museology”. We will discuss the historical context of this intervention and consider the longer history of museums as teaching institutions and research institutions.

Thursday, September 7th— Lab: An Order of Things

In Class: Breaking into groups, students will be given lists of objects regarding medical history. I will be borrowing from the finding aids of contemporary medical museums and archives. From this, the students will be tasked to organize these materials in certain ways: to assign value to what should be shown and what should be left in the archives. Students will be challenged to consider what is valuable, what can be educational, and what can draw audiences.

**Week 4: Object Lessons — Research & Publication in the Digital Age**  
Tuesday, September 12th — Librarian Visit: How to Research Using Google Scholar, IU Cat, and the Lilly Library  
Reading: None  
Object Lesson: None  
In Class: We will be visited by a librarian, who will work through different research tools available through the IU libraries. We will also learn specific search skills to better use search engines like Google and IUCAT.

Thursday, September 14th — Lab: Doing Digital History  
Readings:  
Adam Crymble. “The Digital Past and the Digital Future” in *Technology* *and the Historian: Transformations in the Digital Age*. (Urbana: University of Illinois Press: 2021), 161-170.

Optional Readings:  
Jessica Marie Johnson. “Markup Bodies: Black \[Life\] Studies and Slavery \[Death\] Studies at the Digital Crossroads” *Social Text* 36(4). (2018), 57-79

In Class: We will crowdsource our analysis of the assigned chapter on digital history. Using this text as an example, we will consider how digital tools can strengthen our analytical approaches and scholarly arguments.

Assigned in Class: Project Proposal. **DUE Thursday, September 21st**.

**Week 5: Research Ethics**  
Tuesday, September 19th — Discussion: Stolen Knowledge and Wounded Subjects  
Readings:   
Laud Humphreys. “Tearoom Trade: Impersonal Sex in Public Places” in *Sociology Full Circle* ed. William Feigelman. (NY: Praeger Publishers, 1972), 29-53.   
Rebecca Skloot. “The Exam”, “The Birth of HeLa” and “The HeLa Factory” in *The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks.* (New York: Random House, 2010), 13-17, 34-41, 93-104.  
	Optional Readings:  
Ruth Richardson and Brian Hurwitz. “Jeremy Bentham’s self image: an exemplary bequest for dissection” *British Medical Journal* 295\. (July, 1987), 195-198.  
	Object Lesson: Student Selected  
	  
In Class: We will be challenged with questions about research ethics. What is exploitative? What is valuable? Where can and should we draw the line about how we research sick, sometimes othered populations? Using an infamous study by Laud Humphreys (where Humphreys stalked, misled, and studied gay men in Washington) and the origins of HeLa, we will ask at what point should we use unethically obtained research materials. We will link these questions to issues of “scientific racism” and the history of the museum.

Thursday, September 21st —Lab: Proposal Pitches

**DUE IN CLASS: Project Proposal.**

In Class: At the beginning of class, we will use Net.Create to generate a network linking our project ideas to one another, and use this tool to match up groups for peer review. In these peer review sessions, students will discuss their proposals in an open and generative discussion with their classmates, to think about potential subjects, resonances, and questions. This time will also be one for students who are interested in similar ideas to form groups (if they have not done so already).

Assigned in Class: Proposal Refinement. **DUE Thursday, October 12th.**

**Week 6: Remnants and Revenants**  
Tuesday, September 26th— Discussion: What Remains and What is Displayed  
Readings:  
Robin Mitchell. “Introduction: Black Women in the French Imaginary”, “Entering Darkness: Colonial Anxieties and the Cultural Production of Sara Baartmann” in *Vénus Noire: Black Women and Colonial Fantasies in Nineteenth-Century France*. (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2020), 1-18, 51-80.  
	Optional Readings:  
Joanna Radin. *Life on Ice: A History of New Uses for Cold Blood.* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017).

Object Lesson: Student Selection

In Class: We will use the case of Sara Baatman to consider histories of display, exploitation, and scientific racism, and the critical methods employed by contemporary activists to preserve and protect the memory of exploited subjects.

Thursday, September 28th — Lab: Policy and the Politics of Reclamation

In Class: We will analyze the written policy regarding the reclamation of stolen remains, using three different examples. Press releases regarding the Alder Hey Scandal in the United Kingdom, materials from repatriation of indiginous remains, and materials regarding the controversy over Charles Bryne’s corpse.

Block 2: Medicine’s Past as told by the Dead

**Week 7: Vesalius and Renaissance (Early Modernism)**  
Tuesday, October 3rd — Discussion: Vesalius and the Ancients  
Readings: **CHOOSE ONE\***   
Andrew Cunningham. “Vesalius: The Revival of Galenic Anatomy” in *The Anatomical Renaissance: The Resurrection of the Anatomical Projects of the Ancients.* (Routledge, 2016 Orig. 1997), 88-142.  
Katharine Park. “Empire of Anatomy” in *Secrets of Women: Gender, Generation, and the Origins of Human Dissection*. (New York: Zone Books, 2010), 207-260.  
Object Lesson: Student Selection.

In Class: We will learn how a point of view and research agenda changes analysis through the study of Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius. As each student will have read one of the two texts, we will work through both to discuss the academic point of view displayed by both authors. We will use this time to consider the point of view implied in research agendas and research questions and use this to discuss how significant figures and events are discussed historically.

\* This week’s reading load is a bit more than other weeks. These two chapters are exemplary studies into the history of anatomy. The **object lesson** group for this session will only be asked to read and summarize one article. 

Thursday, October 5th — Lab: Non-Linear Narrative with *Fabrica*

In Class: We will break into sections to look at different pages from Vesalius’ *De humani corporis fabrica libri septem*. We will use these prints to think about the rhetorical strategies displayed in the work. We will also compare these images to materials from medical textbooks before and after the publishing of *Fabrica*.

Week 8: Data and Value  
Tuesday, October 10th —  
Reading:   
Ruth Richardson. “The Corpse as a Commodity” in *Death, Dissection and the Destitute*. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,  1987), 52-74.  
Stuart W. McDonald and John W. Faithfull. “William Hunter’s sources of pathological and anatomical specimens, with particular reference to obstetric subjects,” in *William Hunter’s World: The Art and Science of Eighteenth-Century Collecting* eds. Geoffrey Hancock, Nick Pearce, and Mungo Campbel*l.* (London: Routledge), 45-58.  
Object Lesson: Student Selection

In Class: We will spend the session discussing the history of anatomy in England, using the Hunter brothers as a case study. We will reflect on *who* the anatomical material is published from, and consider the ramifications of the “Parisian Method” in medical science. We will spend time reflecting on the social, political, and scientific ramifications of what happens when the human corpse becomes a commodity.

Thursday, October 12th — Lab: Digital Platforms, Google Pages Tutorial

**DUE IN CLASS: Refined Proposal.**

In Class: We will learn the Google Pages platform. The Institute for Digital Arts and Humanities will join us during this session to run support and give guidance for your projects.

Assigned in Class: Web Exhibit Very Rough Draft. **DUE October 13th at 11:59pm.**

**Week 9: Subjects and Research**  
Tuesday, October 17th — Discussion: The Clinical Portrait  
Readings:   
Katherine D. B. Rawling, “‘She Sits all day in the attitude depicted in the photo’: Photography and the Psychiatric Patient in the Late Nineteenth Century,” *Medical Humanities* 43(2). (2017), 99-110.  
Erin O’Connor. “Camera Medica: Towards a Morbid History of Photography,” *History of Photography* 23(2). (1999), 232-44.  
	Optional Readings:  
Sontag, Susan. *Regarding the Pain of Others*. (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003).  
Carol A. Stabile. “Shooting the Mother: Fetal Photography and the Politics of Disappearance” *Camera Obscura* 10(1). (1992), 178-205.

Object Lesson: Student Selection

In Class: We will be focusing on the practices of medical photography around the turn of the twentieth century. Looking at psychiatric photography, we will consider what the camera can capture, and how that effects and distorts ways of knowing illness.

Assigned in Class: Primary Object Show and Tell. **DUE October 26th.**

Thursday, October 19th — Lab: Scratching, Cutting and Manipulating the Image  
Optional Readings:   
Sean Purcell. “Dermographic Opacities” *Epoisen*. (2022) Web.

In Class: We will be looking at photographs from tuberculosis research, and practicing how to use technologies of photographic manipulation to reframe details for critical analysis. This is my go to strategy of arts-based research methods.

**WE WILL MEET IN A WELLS LIBRARY COMPUTER LAB FOR THIS SESSION.**

**Week 10: Ethics of Maintenance**  
Tuesday, October 24th — Discussion: Reopening Wounds and Human Research  
Readings:   
Megan Rosenbloom. “Prologue: Under Glass” and “Ghosts in the Library” *Dark Archives: A Librarian’s Investigation into the Science and History of Books Bound in Human Skin*. (New York: Picador, 2022), 3-18, 161-184.

Object Lesson: Student Selected

In Class: We will discuss the history of human skin books, with specific care to the practices of medical exploitation used by Nazi Germany. We will discuss the merits of maintaining materials acquired through unethical research practices, and discuss the avenues of maintaining historical collections with horrendous materials.

Thursday, October 26th — Lab: Methods of Opacity and Ethics of Refusal  
	Readings:  
Eduard Glissant. “For Opacity” in *Poetics of Relation* trans. Betsy Wing. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2010, orig. 1990), 189-194.

	**Due in Class: Primary Object Show and Tell.**

In Class: The students will be given research materials acquired through unethical practices. Students will be challenged to come up with a preservation plan (if any) and a presentation plan (if any) regarding these materials. Students will be tasked with considering the ethics of reproducing, spectacularizing, or down playing particular aspects of medical history in their proposals. This in class activity will be contextualized using Édouard Glissant’s ‘opacity’—a postcolonial ethics of refusal.

At the end of the session, students will be asked to reflect on the primary object they wrote about in the Show and Tell assignment. What might they need to do in order to respect their subject’s autonomy? What might they need to respect any right to opacity?

**Assigned in Class:** Annotated Bibliography, DUE November 16th.

Interruption: Working With Public Display

**Week 11: Imaging Consumption I**  
Tuesday, October 31st — Discussion: The History of Tuberculosis  
Readings:   
Helen Bynum. “Prologue: George Orwell” in *Spitting Blood: The History of Tuberculosis*. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), xiii-xxviii.  
René Dubos and Jean Dubos. “The Germ Theory of Tuberculosis” and “Infection and Disease” in *The White Plague: Tuberculosis, Man and Society*. (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1996 orig. 1952), 94-130.  
Optional Readings:  
Sontag, Susan. *Illness as Metaphor and AIDS and Its Metaphors*. (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1990), 3-36.  
Object Lesson: None. In Person at the Cook Center.

In Class: We will spend our first session in the *Imaging Tuberculosis* installation at the Cook Center. We will discuss the history of tuberculosis as it is presented in the two readings. We will discuss the politics of representation in the literature and reflect on how it is presented in the installation.

Thursday, November 2nd —  Lab: Working with the Phipps Institute.

Optional Readings: Jo Guldi. “Critical Search: A Procedure for Guided Reading in Large-Scale Textual Corpora” *History Faculty Publications* (2018), 1-35.

In Class: We will work with primary historical material printed by the Henry Phipps Institute between 1904-1910. We will ask questions about how to do analysis on a large corpus (the term for collected texts used in digital analysis).

**Week 12: Imaging Consumption II**  
Tuesday, November 7th —  
Reading: Linda Bryder. “A National Problem, 1898-1918” in *Below the Magic Mountain: A Social History of Tuberculosis in Twentieth-Century Britain*. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 15-45.  
Optional Readings:  
Georgina D. Felberg. “Coping with Koch’s Challenges: Bacteria, Biologics, and the Economy of Disease, 1880-1915” in *Disease and Class: Tuberculosis and the Shaping of Modern North American Society*. (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1995), 36-80.

Object Lesson: None. In Person at the Cook Center.

In Class: We will spend this class discussing the practice of public history, by comparing Linda Bryder’s *Below the Magic Mountain* to the previous readings.

Thursday, November 9th— Lab: Popular Publications and TB

**DUE IN CLASS: Annotated Bibliography.** 

In Class: We will work through sanitaria publications like *The Sanitorium* published by the National Jewish Consumptive Relief Sanatoria. Students will be asked to classify different kinds of published articles, and reverse engineer the journal’s audience and scope.

Block 3: Contemporary Problems

**Week 13: Spectacular Imagery**   
Tuesday, November 14th — Discussion: The Virtual Humanities  
Reading: Catherine Waldby. “The Visible Human Project: An Initial History” and “Revenants: Death and the Digital Uncanny” in *The Visible Human Project: Informatic Bodies and Posthuman Medicine*. (London & New York: Routledge, 2000), 1-18, 136-156.  
Object Lesson: Student Selected

In Class: We will work through a contemporary case of questionable medicine, the Virtual Human Project. We will discuss what can or should be done with an open data set, and reflect on what it might mean for contemporary medical science.

Thursday, November 16th — No Class

In Class: The Thursday and Friday before Thanksgiving can be difficult times to teach new materials, so we’re just going to take the day off.

**DUE IN CLASS: Annotated Bibliography.** 

THANKSGIVING BREAK: Get some rest. Eat some turkey. Maybe work on final projects???

**Week 14: *Body Worlds***  
Tuesday, November 28th — Contemporary Spectacles  
Readings:  
 John Troyer. “Plastinating Taxonomies” in *Technologies of the Human Corpse*. 73-94.

Object Lesson: Student Selected

In Class: We will discuss the contemporary spectacle of *Body Worlds*. We will consider the political and social ramifications of the project, and discuss the oddly neoliberal philosophies espoused in the project’s many museums and shows.  
	

Thursday, November 30th — Lab: Class Work Time

**Week 15: Conclusions and Student Research**  
Tuesday, December 5th — Conclusions  
No Reading

In Class: We will discuss the semester, and reflect what we have learned. We will open questions we still have and discuss what futures and possibilities the materials afford us as students and professionals.

Thursday, December 7th — Presentations of Student Work  
No Reading. Please come and learn about your classmates’ work\!

**Finals Week: Tuesday, December 12 8am-10am**   
Presentations of Student Work  
No Reading. Please come and learn about your classmates’ work\!  
We may not meet during this session, depending on how many groups there are.

**Final Project DUE on Canvas on Tuesday, December 12 at 11:59pm.**

Appendix A. Assignment Guidelines for the Object Lesson

Object Lesson — Group Assignment (100 Points)  
Most of our Tuesday classes will be opened with a short 5-10 minute presentation by a group of students. These presentations will involve 1\) a quick summary of our **required readings**, 2\) presenting an “object” (described below) to help conceptualize important parts of the readings, and 3\) present 3-5 questions for the class to facilitate discussion.

An **“object”** for this assignment, can be any primary source material related to the subject in class. This can include (but is not limited to):

- a textbook from the period of inquiry  
- an illustration or engraving  
- a portrait of a medical professional  
- X-rays or other photographic material  
- exhibition materials  
- archival catalogs  
- published reports or journal articles  
    
  This object may be related directly to the readings, be thematically related, or conceptually related. Students will be tasked with explaining **why they chose their object**, and **why this object connects to this reading**.  
    
  Students can choose whatever format they like. They can bring a powerpoint presentation, a single slide, a website, or bring in physical materials provided through the IU libraries. **If students wish to show materials from the Lilly Library or elsewhere please contact the instructor a few weeks ahead of time to discuss teaching class outside our regular meeting room.**  
    
  **Students are strongly encouraged to schedule a time with the instructor to discuss possible objects.** This assignment will give students a hands-on opportunity to work on the lesson plan if they wish, and they are encouraged to work with the instructor to better facilitate the class in which they present.


Some Suggestions\!

* Don’t overthink it\! Some readings are talking about specific objects, see if you can find high resolution images, versions of important cases, or examples related to the case study.  
* Break down the assignment into 3 parts  
1) What is the article or articles arguing  
   * Can you find a thesis statement? If not, can you write a one sentence thesis from the article?  
   * What objects are they examining? List 1-5 key players that they discuss.  
   * What is at stake for the author? Why do they think their argument is important?  
   * Do you agree with them? If yes, why? If no, why not?  
2) What is your object?  
   * Describe it in one sentence.  
   * Why does it apply to the articles?  
   * Why did you choose it? (Were there any other objects you considered?)  
3) What questions do you have for your classmates?  
   * Frame your questions as open:  
     * Not yes or no  
     * Instead, ask “why”, “how”, “what” or “why” questions  
   * Connect the object to the articles  
     * “Looking at this x-ray, we didn’t see what the author claimed, do you see it?”  
- **You do not have to be experts**\! Your questions can be as simple as: “We didn’t understand this aspect, how did the class grapple with this?” (In this case, be as specific as possible.)  
- Finally, **the instructor is here to help at any stage\!** (This includes in class during your presentation.) Reach out early to schedule a meeting ahead of the week you’ll be leading, and feel free to send any materials from drafts, to powerpoint slides to the instructor as late as 5pm on Monday afternoon before your presentation

Appendix B. Rubric for Object Lesson Assignment

Rubric for the Object Lesson Assignment — 100 Points

|  | Poor | Fair | Good | Excellent |
| :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Students provide a relevant object for discussion. (10 points) | There is no object, or the object has no relationship or connection to the readings.  **0-4 points** | The object has some connections to the readings, but it is difficult to see how it is relevant or applies to the week’s materials.  **5-6 points** | The object is relevant, but it is unclear how it connects to the problems discussed in the readings or the questions the students bring to class. **7-8 points** | The object is relevant, and brings in detail for the discussion in class.  **9-10 points** |
| Students describe the reading, and the main points they took from it. (25 points) | The students fail to describe the articles in any way. They miss the main points, or appear to have skipped reading altogether.  **0-10 points** | The students describe the articles, but are unable to come to the main points. They miss the major argument.  **11-17 points** | The students sufficiently describe the articles and their main points, but fail to grasp the larger context or argument being made.  **18-21 points** | The students sufficiently describe the articles and their main points, and outline the issues and broader conversations the article appears to be making. **22-25 points** |
| Students sufficiently describe the object for students and connect it to the day’s readings.  (25 points) | The students fail to explain why the object connects to the readings.  **0-10 points** | The students connect the object to the readings, but the connection is tenuous, unclear, or strained. **11-17 points** | The students connect the object to the readings, and explain why they chose the object in detail. **18-21 points** | The students connect the object to the readings, explain why they chose it, and formulated their questions to connect the object back to the readings. **22-25 points** |
| Students provide 3-5 questions for discussion, and facilitate the beginning of discussion.  (40 points) | There are no questions. Students fail to facilitate a discussion. **0-20 points** | There are fewer than 3 questions, and students struggle to engage with the questions. The questions are closed (yes or no), or do not connect to the material sufficiently. **21-27 points** | There are 3-5 questions that are open ended and connect the material; however, students are unable to sufficiently begin the discussion. **28-34 points** | There are 3-5 questions that are open and connect the material to the object. Students are able to engage the discussion. **35-40 points** |

[^1]:  This is still in negotiation with the Cook Center, with final dates to be confirmed some time after the submission of this syllabus to the Collins LLC.