---
layout: item
format: Role Terminated
title: "REDACTED EXAMPLE: Unlocking Your Creativity"
state: Indiana
level: "200 - Sophomore"
categories: [ "Cultural Studies", Arts ]
disc: "Cultural Studies"
school: "Indiana University"
year: 2024
term: "Spring"
intro: "This course taught students the power and possibility of creative activity."
shortintro: "This course taught students the power and possibility of creative activity."
banstate: "This educator was fired for X reason."
identifier: "20242_IU_001"
---

## Syllabus: Unlocking your Creativity

X151 Unlocking your Creativity  
<!-- REDACTED -->XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX<!-- END -->  
   
**Revised Syllabus: 2/12/2024**  
   
Instructor Information:  
<!-- REDACTED -->XXXXXXXXXXXX  <!-- END --> 
<!-- REDACTED -->XXXXXXXXXXXX<!-- END --> 
<!-- REDACTED -->XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX<!-- END --> 
<!-- REDACTED -->XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX <!-- END --> 
   
**Course Description:**  
   
What is creativity? Is it something we receive from outside? Are we born with it? Can we cultivate it in ourselves or in others? Is creativity important for our world? Do I need to know anything about creativity to live my life?  
   
This course will examine creativity as it can be practiced in our everyday lives. We will reflect on how it can be manifest in the arts, in our careers, and in our research. We will reflect on what creativity means to each of us, and think about how our relationship to creativity can be leveraged to better our lives. We will also spend time thinking about how creativity is discussed, understood, and sometimes exploited in our contemporary culture.  
   
**Learning Goals:**  
   
1)	Students will learn different approaches to creativity, through their own explorations over the semester. In this process they will be asked to develop habits to practice creativity regularly.  
2)   Students will learn about different ways to apply creative methods to their professional and private lives.  
3)   Students will learn to understand how creative labor is practiced, and sometimes exploited.  
   
**Assignments:**  
   
**Weekly Journals**  
Students are asked to complete a weekly journal assignment. These are low stakes reflections where students can work through ideas brought up during the class. They serve as a way for students to have another entry point to the curriculum, as well as a way for the instructor to measure the student’s progress over the semester.  
   
**Blog Posts (2 Over the 8 Weeks)**  
Students will be asked to choose two weeks over the semester and submit a longer, blog style essay (750-1000 words) responding to one of the readings/videos/podcasts. These essays will be published as part of the class’ blog, [found here](https://x152creativity.github.io/blog/).  
On the weeks students do a blog post they will NOT be required to write a journal.  
   
**Creativity Log**  
As part of the course, students will be tasked to practice their creativity outside of the class. Following the framework of Anne Lamott, students are asked to work independently for 3 hours each week (preferably one hour over three different days) on a creative task. The students will include a summary of this work in their weekly journals.  
   
**Self-Reflection**  
As the main part of the class’ evaluative metrics, students will submit 3 self-reflection assignments. These assignments allow the student to look to see if they are completing the required tasks during the semester, and to reflect on what they are learning as well as what they want to learn. These are also the main way grades are given, because at the end of each self-reflection the student will be asked to grade themselves on their progress so far in the term.  
   
**Required Texts for this Class:**  
   
We will read Tille Waldren’s graphic novel [*Spinning*](https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781626729407/spinning) in week 6 of the class. Please get a copy by week 4.  
[[There are copies available through Wells Library, the Residential Libraries, and Monroe County Public Library.]]  
   
All other texts will be provided on the course’s Canvas page.  
   
**Grades:**  
   
<!-- REDACTED --> XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  <!-- END -->
   
<!-- REDACTED --> XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX <!-- END -->
   
**Attendance:**  
   
I will not be using attendance as a main criteria for final evaluation. I will be taking attendance, however, so that I can track students who are having trouble. If you miss class, or a few classes in a row, I will send a short email checking in.